PROPOSAL FOR FUNDING MAI-MAHIU LEMALAH CHILDREN’S HOME
Request for Funding to Provide Care and Education for the 52 Children at the Lemalah Children’s Home in Mai-Mahiu, Nakuru County and with anticipation to cover a long waiting list of new applicants.
Project Duration
Long-Term Planning with Continuous Annual Reviews.

Introduction
Kenya is one of the developing countries in Africa with lower middle income economy and GDP hitting $121 billion as of 2024. This is due to increasing technology innovation services. Although Kenya's economy is the largest and most developed in eastern and Central Africa, 25% (2023/2024) of its population lives below the internationally defined poverty line, making less than USD $3.20 per day, according to the United States Agency for international development. With a population of approximately 53.8 million in 2024, Kenya ranked among the 10 most populated nations in Africa according to the data published in the Statistica research journal website which is used by many researchers and businesspeople. The data went on to say that by March 2024, approximately 8-Million Kenyans will live below the internationally defined poverty line purged at living on less than US$3.25 a day. Another casualty of about 5 Million Kenyans will live in extreme poverty of less than USD $2.00 per day. Those living in the extreme poverty line live in the rural areas for less than USD $1.00 per day. 
Since 1992, Major trans-regional conflict and tribal clashes have resulted in the death of thousands of local people and several others displaced, mostly in Rift Valley Province. As a result, families became homeless, landless, squatters and/or slum dwellers. Due to dislocation of families during and post-conflict, children are often separated from their parents, and close relatives. Others are orphaned and majorities are left in extreme poverty. Violent ethnic conflicts have very direct effects far beyond their epicenters. They involve refugee flows, internal displacement, regional instability, economic failures, environmental disasters, diffusion and spillover effects, that leads to conditions favorable to organized crime and terrorism. 
In a 2019 study on incidences of child abuse, led by the United States Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in partnership with Together for Girls (Kenyan Chapter) with additional support from the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) and United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF), estimated that about 50% of all Kenyan children experience physical, emotional, or sexual and domestic violence. Abuse and abandonment are multifaceted issues in Kenya. Consequently, it is estimated that there are 3.6 Million Kenyan children under the age of 18 who have been orphaned or are vulnerable. Children that live in extreme poverty go without food for many days. To such children, having any kind of shelter, clothing, and education are not even a priority. The availability of food is their only concern. Consequently, many such children run away from home and end up as street children in small towns and major cities where they beg for food and can even become petty thieves just to get food from day to day. This incredibly tragic situation is generic to many Third World countries or developing nations.

Poverty cases in Kenyan context reflects on all the rural villages and small towns throughout the country. The families in these rural areas are normally large and often face myriad financial problems. The earning members of the family are usually daily wage-laborers while others are casual workers. They earn so little per day and are often unable to cope with the responsibilities of taking care of their families. Sometimes they may not even get work, so the families become destitute, homeless and helpless. 

The struggle of the poor starts in the womb. The child in the womb suffers from the consequences of malnutrition in the mother. These families live in utter poverty. They are unable to fetch their square meal a day. The majority of parents are unable to pay school fees or buy books and school supplies, so the children end up dropping out of school. 
Someone needs to do something to help these innocent children that are victims of circumstances way beyond their control. Their future is totally bleak unless someone steps in to give them a helping hand and give them hope for a better tomorrow. Lemalah Children’s Home quite literally sprung up after destitute children were dropped off at the door of one of the founders. At first there were two young children who were brought to us by relatives after they became streets boys in Githurai, Nairobi. The two young boys had run away from violence and sexual abuse in their home. Later, their mother was found murdered, so we took in their two sisters who had nowhere to go. Since then, more and more children have been brought to Lemalah by various relatives and/or concerned neighbors. Today, Lemalah has 52 children in total, and they are beyond the capacity that we can support. There are so many needy children in the village as well as in the surrounding areas, but we just are unable to take in anymore until we have the resources to adequately feed, clothe, provide medical care, education and formidable shelter for the ones we already have. We will need to build structures to decongest the current living conditions first, separate the boys and the girls, and hopefully accommodate many more children. 
Our Story
Lemalah Children’s Home is a Registered Community Based Organization (CBO) with the Ministry of Culture and Social Services in Kenya. All the children at the home come from extremely poor and/or dysfunctional families. Some of them are orphans and some have never known their parents. A couple of them were physically and sexually abused by relatives and people close to them while there was no father figure in the home. Others had no one to take care of them and concerned neighbors brought them to the Children’s home. Two grandmothers brought their grandkids to the facility because they were old and ailing and could no longer feed them. Some of the kids were homeless street kids with no food, shelter or parents. A single parent in the village passed away and left her children homeless and hungry so Lemalah took them in.
Lemalah children’s home started with 4 children in 2006. The 4 children were all siblings, but they lived in separate dysfunctional homes with desperately poor relatives. The very first children were Wilson Muga and James Gitonga who used to be street boys in Githurai. Their mother was a hopeless drunkard and there reportedly was incest within the family. They did not have a father figure, but there was a grandfather who used to abuse their sisters. Pastor Warari was approached by a family member who begged him to rescue the two boys. Later on, their mother was found murdered in coffee bushes around Juja (a local village near Githurai). So, their two sisters joined the boys to live with Pastor Warari at his residence in Kahawa West, Nairobi.
When people found out that Pastor Warari was taking care of dejected children, they started bringing others and it got to the point where he could not keep them in his house anymore. So, he approached Mrs. Theresiah W. Njogu, who was an elder in his church, for support. Together, they constructed a semi-permanent structure on the church plot in Ndeiya, Limuru to accommodate the growing number of needy children. But even with the new structure it was impossible to take in all the needy cases. Within a few years the number of children had more than doubled and there was no longer enough room for them in the small building. They obtained some funds from the sale of a plot and purchased 5 acres of land in Mai Mahiu, Nakuru County. Here, with the support of well-wishers and the local community, they built 2 small structures and relocated Lemalah Children’s home to the land. Mrs. Njogu’s children, who live in the USA, heard about the dire situation and offered their support with the construction of some of the buildings as well as financial support for school fees and basic needs for the children. 

The following are some of the background information for some of the children at Lemalah. For instance, there is James Wamalwa. He said his father was a pastor who disappeared, never to return. After some time, his brother David Wasike joined the home. They are from western Kenya. Today, they are both in Vocational colleges after finishing High School. There are also 4 children who neither knew their father nor mother. They were brought in by their ailing grandmother from Kipipiri, Nyandarua. The grandmother explained that both parents passed on when they were young. She was diabetic, but her condition improved when the burden was lifted off her shoulders. They are Hannah Njoki, John Cena Mburu, Jackie Wairimu and Karuga Lucas. Hannah is in form three (High school) while John Cena is in form Two. Lucas is in Junior secondary. They came to Lemalah Children’s Home as little children, but they are now young adults. Another grandmother from the same area heard that these children were brought to Lemalah. She personally came to us; social inquiries were made before accepting her two children, James Mucheke and Elijah Gitau.

[See Attached Table 1]: The story of how each child found their way to Lemalah Children’s Home and where they are currently, is contained in Table 1.

Initial Funding and Sustainable Goals

The two founders first sold a small plot of land in a nearby town to obtain funds for the first structure's construction. Some well-wishers from the community saw their vision and chipped in. There was an anonymous donor who used to come to Lemalah in a double cabin pick-up and brought food once in a while. One day a well-wisher came by with some supplies. Another anonymous Kenyan has been sending some money weekly until recently. A friend in South Africa has given approximately Kshs 40,000 (about $330) every month since 2007. Two friends in America have been giving USD 350 monthly. The rest of the funds have come from the occasional well-wisher and mostly from our pockets. Those in the church have always helped in a big way. Young people have formed into groups and organized events to come and to help wash the children's clothes, socialize, counsel, and bring them food. We have a few friends who give from time to time. It's our prayer we get consistent funding so we can strategize and actualize our plans for sustainability, growth, and development. Lemalah currently cultivate their own vegetables, tomatoes, and onions. They also grow corn, beans, peas, and some fruits. They have one cow though it does not give them enough milk, so they have a dream of purchasing more cows. Additionally, they have 60 chickens for eggs. Local groups sometimes help with food.

(1) THE CURRENT PRESSING NEEDS: The number of children has rapidly increased to 52 currently with a long waiting list. Many of the siblings of the Lemalah children are suffering and they have been begging to be accepted at the home. However, our resources are very limited. We have very few well-wishers and hence, we do self-financing that we have been struggling to keep up with the large number of children we currently have. We are barely affording to feed and clothe them let alone providing school fees. The living spaces that we have currently are barely enough, so the children are having to share beds, space, and the limited resources available. Our greatest need is providing enough food for 3 meals a day and other necessities such as toothpaste, bathing soaps, feminine products for the girls, bedding, school supplies and clothing. The home has a borehole for clean drinking water, but we need a water pump to provide running water for the kitchen and the bathrooms. We also need a perimeter fence and a gate for the home and a night security guard. We will also need to build a few more structures/hostels to separate the boys’ and girls’ living spaces and ease the congestion in the dormitories. A modern kitchen with more copersonel is also needed for the facility.
In the very near future, our vision is to expand and transform the Children’s Home into a school. For this, we 
will need to build classrooms in the next two to three years and hire qualified teachers. Hopefully in about 7 years we will be a full-fledged private primary and/or secondary school for both our children and the children in the neighboring villages. This way we will help poor and indigent children in the neighborhood that we are otherwise unable to accommodate at our facility. In addition, we can have boarding facilities specifically for the children we have. The price of land is still affordable around Mai-Mahiu, so currently we are able to expand if and when we have the finances. Eventually, we can build a Polytechnic or a vocational training college which will teach basic life skills and computer technology to enable young adults to get employment and self-sufficiency. 
(2) TARGET GROUPS FOR THE PROJECT: Our target group includes children from indigent as well as dysfunctional families. We do not wish to see any child suffer in any way, particularly from lack of food. We wish we could help all the needy children at least in the villages close by. It is our dream to open several branches of Lemalah Children’s Home in other parts of the country to help the indigent children in those areas as well. We could even open branches in other countries if finances are available. Our dream is to help as many children as is humanly possible. 
(3) PROJECT LOCATION: We are currently located in the Mai-Mahiu area, which is a village that is about 33 miles northwest of Nairobi. We have never had to look for children that need our help. The children found us through concerned relatives and/or neighbors, and they have come to us from all over the country. We currently have a long waiting list of needy children that we have not been able to accept due to our limited resources. Thus, your financial help will go a very long way in helping these children on the waiting list find a loving and accepting facility that they can call home. It pains us to say no to these children, but our hands are really tied by the limited resources that we currently have. 
(4) PROJECT VISION AND GOALS: It is the aim of the Lemalah Children Home’s board of management to see to it that each child grows into a responsible, disciplined, and God-fearing adult. We place high values especially on discipline. Success in any way without discipline may not be beneficial to an individual after all. In addition, we place a high value on education since a good education is one of the necessary foundations to a life of success. It's our desire that the children get as much education as they can and get life skills to live and work anywhere in this world. Our joy will be complete when we see each of them fully grown with healthy families of their own, serving the almighty and fellow men and women.

Project Objectives
To provide orphans, semi orphans, destitute children, and children who have never experienced quality childhood life before and help them to become useful members of the society
To encourage orphans, semi orphans, and destitute children to rekindle their potential by providing creative opportunities in a loving, understanding, empathetic, and accepting environment.
To make available a secure place where orphans, semi orphans, and destitute children can play and enjoy their childhood lives.
To provide basic education to orphans, semi orphan, and destitute children.
To provide quality welfare services like free lodging, boarding, health and recreation
To provide basic literacy and facilities for those who wish to study further
To select and prepare for a vocation or technical careers to enable them to live on their own.
To help in the accomplishing of the physical, intellectual and mental development of the child

Project Current Activities
Pre-view of the incoming orphan, semi orphan, and destitute children's problems and difficulties
Emotional acceptance of the child
Provide resources for basic education as well as college, university, and vocational training
Teaching facilities for basic education (this is a future objective)
Teaching facilities for vocational courses and crafts (this is a future objective as well)
Lodging and boarding facilities for all children.
Recreational facilities.
Primary health.

Impact Analysis
The project will be monitored at regular intervals through a “Project Advisory Committee (PAC)” constituted by the Director of the facility as convener or member secretary. Authorities from the Funding Agency, Local District Administration etc., will be nominated as members of the project advisory committee. This committee would meet periodically once in 3 months and advise on various aspects concerning the implementation of project and review of the programs/activities undertaken. The Project Advisory Committee will also review the accounts and audited statements.
Cost Tables for Lemalah Children’s home
Please see the attached spreadsheet of current itemized costs and expenses
Board of Directors
Chair of the Board of Directors – Mrs. Theresiah W. Njogu
Chief Executive Officer – Ms. Lucy M. Njogu
Director of Operations – Pastor Peter Warari
Director of Finance – Dr. Sophie N. Harris
Director of Human Resources – Pastor John K. Njogu
IT Manager – Sharon W. Kinyanjui
References
Miedema, Stephanie Spaid, et al. “Cross-Time Comparison of Adverse Childhood Experience Patterns among Kenyan Youth: Violence Against Children and Youth Surveys, 2010 and 2019.” Child Abuse & Neglect, Pergamon, 28 Apr. 2023, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0145213423001345?via%3Dihub.
Muraya, Joy Wanja. “Action Urged as National Survey Finds Half of Kenyan Children Suffer Violence.” UNICEF, UNICEF Kenya, 16 July 2020, https://www.unicef.org/kenya/press-releases/Action-urged-as-national-survey-finds-half-of-Kenyan-children-suffer-violence
